GIS PROGRAM

STRATEGIC PROGRAM BUSINESS CASE

Office of Information Technology Services
Ohio EPA

Prepared by:	Bridget Simpson & Michele Kennedy
Program Sponsor:	Mary Beth Parisi
Proposed Start Date:	07.01.2014


A.	PURPOSE
A Geographic Information System (GIS) by its very nature is a system of interdependencies among organizational business needs, 
geospatial information and tools, and technology.  At Ohio EPA, we have now laid the groundwork for an effective enterprise 
GIS that efficiently serves the needs of the GIS community of users, division and agency-wide initiatives, and the citizens 
of Ohio.  We have also consolidated and organized GIS resources within the Office of Information Technology Services (ITS).

With this foundation in place, it is now possible to build a structured framework to facilitate an effective GIS which serves 
the strategic vision for the agency.   Efforts are now under way to establish basic processes to effectively manage and track 
GIS work and initiatives.  To ensure the success of these processes, a GIS Program should be established to formalize both 
processes and outcomes for any GIS work undertaken by the agency.

B.	PROGRAM STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
GIS Web Services
Project requests will include priorities originating from the Director’s Office and Division programs.  Web services project 
work may include geospatial data preparation and organization, design and development of data delivery mechanisms and the map 
portal module, and publication activities.  Web services may include external or internal facing applications.

The end level objectives for this sub-program include the following:
  1.	Provide a dynamic, up-to-date, web-based GIS, which is publicly available for viewing or downloading geospatial 
  information.
  2.	Develop and serve a full complement of agency generated data, consolidated in a one-stop GIS portal.
  3.	Provide community mapping opportunities and develop mobile GIS applications.

Enterprise Level Projects
Project requests will be initiated by the CIO or PMO Office and in some cases the GIS Office directly.  Projects within this 
sub-program will address technology initiatives required to support agency organizational strategic objectives, in the direct 
service of the business needs of the agency.  Location-based information is central to the business of the agency, and every 
enterprise project will have some associated GIS component.

The end level objective for this sub-program is:
  1.	Integrate GIS technology with other agency technical systems as required and defined by agency business needs.

Application Development
Project requests will be initiated primarily by the division programs.  Projects within this sub-program will address requests 
for customized desktop applications, maps, tools, geospatial analysis, or workflows.  These projects will provide services 
directly to GIS users and agency programs.

The end level objectives for this sub-program include the following:
  1.	Develop in-house desktop applications, maps, tools, and workflow designs.
  2.	Provide guidance and training to the agency GIS community.

Operations and Maintenance
Project requests will originate from a business unit or directly from the GIS Office, and occasionally from sources outside of 
Information Technology Services (ITS) or the agency.  Projects within this sub-program will incorporate day to day operational 
work, scheduled maintenance work for GIS systems and applications, enterprise upgrades, ticketing support, and geospatial data 
management activities and services.

The end level objectives for this sub-program include the following:
  1.	Provide consistently scheduled enterprise in-house applications, third-party software, and server maintenance.
  2.	Maintain public-facing GIS internet artifacts and custom applications.
  3.	Provide consistently scheduled enterprise data updates and maintenance.
  4.	Provide quality GIS customer service.

Collaboration Initiatives
Project requests will be initiated by the GIS team engaging in collaborative opportunities with external federal, state, and 
local partners.  Projects within this sub-program will facilitate agency GIS outreach and collaboration efforts with partners 
outside the agency.  This is an important organizational strategic initiative.

The end level objective for this sub-program is:
  1.	Collaborate and develop cooperative relationships with the GIS community at the local, state, and federal levels.

NHD Stewardship
Project requests are governed by the GIS Office, and may originate from the agency itself, external sub-steward groups, or 
federal or state partners.  Projects within this sub-program will address all stewardship activities, including stewardship 
governance and technical support.  This initiative has been approved by the Director and CIO as part of the agency’s 
organizational strategic initiative.

The end level objective for this sub-program is:
  1.	Implement the NHD Stewardship agreement.

C.	PROGRAM BENEFITS
Each sub-program will result in the following benefits:

GIS Web Services
•	Increased communications with the public, legislature, US EPA, Ohio EPA, other state agencies, and the regulated 
community.

Enterprise Level Projects
•	Increased productivity through up-to-date GIS systems using continuous improvement processes.

Application Development
•	Customized applications, maps, tools, and workflows which are specific to agency business needs.
•	Standardized desktop services for ease of development and maintenance.
•	Improved collaboration with agency programs and business units.
•	Increased GIS Office knowledge and education regarding agency business needs specifically pertaining to GIS.
•	Increased quality and quantity of geospatial problem solving established through a well-educated team of GIS users.
•	Improved environmental decision-making based on better geospatial analysis and outputs.

Operations and Maintenance
•	Decreased hours and costs spent mitigating technical issues.
•	Increased productivity for developers and internal GIS customers by providing a consistent environment.
•	Created a better informed public and improving communications with the public, legislature, US EPA, Ohio EPA, other state 
agencies, and the regulated community.
•	Improved agency environmental decision-making by providing the most current and accurate data available to internal GIS 
customers.
•	Upheld quality customer service standards for GIS technical support.
•	Upheld quality customer service standards for public requests for information.

Collaboration Initiatives
•	Benefited the citizens of Ohio with agency leadership and GIS expertise in geospatial endeavors.
•	Decreased costs through increased knowledge in cooperative relationships, shared information, and shared resources.
•	Increased creativity through synergistic relationships.

NHD Stewardship
•	Improved customer service as a result of higher quality data.
•	Improved environmental decision-making as a result of high quality and up-to-date data.

D.	REQUIRED RESOURCES 
This section provides a high-level estimate of all resources required for the program.  It shows why they are needed, and 
when they need to be available.  (Resources - Why Needed;	When Needed)

Staffing:		
ITS GIS Team - Core Team; For the duration of the program
OIT GIS Team - Partner core team, GIS Software support;	As needed for specific projects
Infrastructure resources - Support for GIS hardware, networking, storage, etc.;	As needed for specific projects
DBA resources - Back-end database support; As needed for specific projects
Division SME’s - Business unit expertise and requirements definition; As needed, involved in most projects

Software, hardware, and other equipment:	
Data storage - High volume of mission critical data stores; Consistent need for day to day functions
Software maintenance - Yearly maintenance and licensing fees; As fees are due
Hardware maintenance - Upgrades as needed to maintain current technology; As needed

Training:
GIS developer training - Keep developer skills current; As needed
Software training - Keep up with software updates and skills; As needed
Program Management and leadership training - Build skills; As needed

E.	FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
We will collect information on cost estimates and funding sources for each GIS project.  Over time, this information will be 
tracked and documented and will provide a historical reference for future GIS Program budgeting efforts.  Cost tracking will 
be managed consistently with the policies of the Program Management Office.  GIS resources work based on a charge-back model.

The goal is for each business unit to provide a planned budget and/or funding source that will be available to the GIS 
Program for project implementation.

F.	ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS
Assumptions:
1.	The GIS Office will manage the projects or parts of projects which are part of the program.
2.	Resources will be made available from the business units to provide subject matter expertise or technical expertise as 
needed.
3.	Appropriate funds will be allocated to support the requested work.
4.	GIS will continue to be an integral part of agency environmental protection efforts and a key mechanism to communicate 
environmental information with stakeholders and the public.
5.	Partnerships between Ohio EPA GIS and other state and federal agencies will continue to be encouraged as a way to share 
knowledge and resources.

Constraints:
1.	Resources and funding are anticipated constraints.
2.	The statewide IT Optimization process impacts GIS systems and resources.

G.	INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL INFLUENCES 
GIS work should be organized as a program in order to facilitate prioritization, planning, and implementation of GIS projects 
at a strategic level.  This is particularly important due to the volume of GIS work required by the agency and the level at 
which GIS is integrated into agency functions and systems.  GIS is an important tool and system for the agency.

The following are internal influences that create the need for the GIS Program:
1.	The Director’s Office has driven much of our recent consolidation and publication activities based on organizational 
strategy.  The expectation is that the GIS Office will continue on this path.
2.	The GIS Office was recently consolidated within the Office of Information Technology Services (ITS) as part of a 
strategic reorganization of IT professionals within the agency.  GIS work has been integrated into ITS initiatives and 
this effort is expected to continue.
3.	Agency divisions and programs make extensive use of GIS for various geospatial analysis and environmental decision-making 
efforts.

The following is an external influence that creates the need for the GIS Program:
1.	GIS provides an exceptional mechanism for communicating environmental information with agency stakeholders, especially 
the citizens of Ohio.  Other stakeholders include federal and state agencies, state legislature, and the regulated community.

H.	ALTERNATIVE ANALYSIS 
No alternative analysis for a GIS Program has been completed.  None are planned at this time.

I.	PROGRAM COMPLEXITY
GIS is a complex program, and the work done by the GIS Office touches a great number of programs and workflows within the 
agency.  It is imperative for the success of GIS as an effective agency tool for environmental analysis and communication 
that the agency undertakes the development and implementation of a GIS Program.  Establishing this program will provide 
defined management, organization, and governance for all agency GIS efforts, and will result in more consistent and reliable 
outcomes to the benefit of the agency and the citizens of Ohio.

J.	APPROVALS
The business case will need approval by members of the portfolio review board and primary stakeholders.
